By the summer of 1944.
the terror and tyranny
of the Nazi Third Reich
shrouds most of Europe.
Occupied countries
resist as they can.
But with the advance of
Soviet forces in the east.
and the success of the Normandy
invasion in the west.
two of the world's great cities
organize in force and fight back.
Even in the place of
greatest horror.
there is resistance.
All wars change the world.
but none of them
changed the world
like the Second World War did.
Japan's on the march.
Germany's on the march.
No one can imagine the nightmare
they're about to unleash.
The most destructive
war in human history.
Suddenly. the world
is turned upside down
and all hell is let loose.
The West is stunned by
the speed of the advance.
You get the Allies
led by the big three:
Roosevelt. Churchill. Stalin.
Men who are dealing with
immensely
complicated questions.
It's the biggest military
operation of human history.
The Allies have to come together.
not just militarily.
but industrial scale.
It's a global perspective.
They have to fight in
every climate
from the Arctic to the jungles
of the Pacific.
to the deserts of Africa
and the depths of the ocean.
But there was no
certainty of victory.
It was going to be
a horrific bloodbath.
We see humans at
their absolute worst.
how they treat other human beings.
and we see them at their
absolute best.
willing to give their lives
that others might live.
World War II was a struggle
in which there could be
one victor...
...and one vanquished.
Support us and become VIP member
to remove all ads from www.OpenSubtitles.org
Since the fall of France.
the BBC has broadcast
daily radio programming
to occupied Europe.
Embedded within the broadcasts
are coded messages.
The night before D-Day.
the Allied invasion
of Western Europe.
the broadcast to occupied France
includes a line from a poem
by Paul Verlaine.
The French resistance is waiting.
and when the BBC announces:
"Wound my heart with
a monotonous languor."
this is the word that they
have been waiting to hear:
the invasion is on.
The Allies want that
resistance movement to rise up.
to blow up German railroads. to
ambush German patrols.
and to disrupt the Germans
in any way they can.
All of their planning.
all of their networking
now goes into action
to slow the German response
so that the Allies
can win the race
to build up and break out.
So many men and women
throughout France
have risked so
much to get to this night
and the beginning of
their country's liberation.
After the
fall of France in 1940.
there are two Frances.
There's the France
that is directly occupied by
the Germans. including Paris.
and there is a puppet regime
with its capital at Vichy.
So resistance
groups form in each one.
From the start. the
inspiration for French resistance
to Germany
was embodied by one man.
A veteran of the Great War.
General Charles De Gaulle.
Charles De Gaulle
fought all the way
through the German invasion
of France in 1940.
Rather than
surrender to the Germans.
rather than go along
with the French government.
he arrives in Britain by himself
and just says. "By the way.
I'm now
the leader of the Free French."
He's self-appointed.
Churchill goes.
"Eh. he might be useful."
He gives him an office.
gives him a radio.
lets him do some broadcasts.
He's gonna announce:
"The Vichy
government is illegitimate."
Anybody who's in France
should come over to England.
and we're gonna start
to put together an army
that's gonna liberate ourselves.
If you can't get here.
you should start
resisting while you're there."
This is an
extremely important event
in galvanizing
the French people.
Up to that point. they'd been
in a state of despondency
at the rapid defeat at
the hands of the Germans.
Now. here was a voice.
one of their own.
offering them hope.
He says.
"The flame of French resistance
Must not be extinguished.
and will not be extinguished."
These are words
that French men and women
were longing to hear.
It's not only the beginning
of the resistance.
it's the beginning of the rise
of Charles De Gaulle
to political power in France.
Resistance pops
up all over the country.
But these groups aren't connected.
and they all stand
for different things.
There are
aristocratic Catholics.
Communists. Republicans.
There are all different
groups jockeying for position
between themselves
and fighting against
the Germans as well.
A cross-section
of French citizens.
teachers. lawyers.
farmers. factory workers.
take part in the resistance.
Women play a substantial role.
One of the
most important activities
of the resistance was
a network of agents
and secret codes
and safe houses
that helped smuggle downed
Allied flyers out of France
and back to safety in Britain.
This underground railroad helped
about 5.000 Allied flyers
make it to freedom
in the course of the war.
It's the
potential of the Allied invasion
eventually reaching
France that cause volunteers
to flock to the resistance.
They're gathering equipment.
supplies. weapons
because they think:
"Eventually. we will be freed.
How do we help accelerate that?"
The night before D-Day.
dozens of Allied agents are
dropped behind German lines
to coordinate with groups
of the French resistance.
so-called "Jedburgh teams."
Three-man teams
who parachute into occupied
an American. a British.
and a French agent.
They
bring weapons with them.
They'd bring a radio set
so they could communicate.
They coordinate activities.
and they inform the groups
what the Allies are up to.
The Jedburghs have an ultimate
goal. and that is to
ease the invasion plan
for June. 1944.
Once the Allies
land in June 6th.
the resistance
becomes emboldened.
But many pay a grievous
price for their courage.
Germans. with the help
of French collaborators.
hunt down anyone
assisting the Allies.
The costs
of being in the resistance
or around the resistance
are incredibly high.
They could be
arrested and put in jail.
they could be sent to
a labor camp. hung.
oftentimes without trial
and in public
as a deterrence
to everyone else.
The Gestapo
carryout reprisals.
"For every one of
our soldiers killed.
we will kill 50
resistance fighters."
Four days after the invasion.
near the village of
Oradour-sur-Glane.
the local resistance kills
an SS battalion commander.
Nazi retribution is
swift and merciless.
They take all the men and they
shove them into
a bunch of barns.
shoot them.
and set the barns on fire.
They take all the
women and children
and put them in a church
and then burn the church
to the ground.
shooting anyone
who tries to climb out.
Collective vengeance
for the act of resistance.
On July 25th.
the Americans launch
a massive air and ground attack:
Operation Cobra.
After a month
and a half of combat
among the hedgerows
of Normandy.
the Allies now break through
the German defensive perimeter.
Paris is the center
of the German occupying force.
But the Allies were not
super interested in Paris.
Cities are an enormous
military problem.
Do you go into Paris
knowing that you could
end up fighting an urban battle
that you don't want to fight?
The streets narrow
your ability to maneuver.
So fighting inside a city
is nobody's idea
of what you want to do.
Of course. if you're French. the
situation is completely different.
The French people are
thinking that the Allies are
just a few hundred
kilometers from the city of Paris.
and they believe
that Paris will be next
in the great capitals of
Europe to be liberated
from Nazi fascism.
To the French. Paris
is not just the capital of France.
It is the most important.
most symbolic city
that you're going to liberate.
And the man who thinks
he's going to take control
of all of this is
Charles De Gaulle.
Throughout the war.
he builds up Free French
forces in London and in Africa.
French soldiers
flock to his colors.
And. by D-Day.
he has something of
a Free French armed force.
And De Gaulle is astonished
and appalled
to hear that the Allies are not
focusing on Paris
as a key objective.
Paris is like the beating
heart of the French republic.
There is no France
without Paris.
And De Gaulle said.
"If you're not going. I'm going."
Allied forces
advance across France
to force the Wehrmacht's retreat
to the Rhine and beyond.
Liberating Paris
from German occupation
is not their main
strategic concern.
But Parisians have other ideas.
The problem
for Paris is that.
when the Normandy invasion
happens.
it cuts the city off from
its principal food supply.
And the Germans are
trying to take everything
that they can out of the city.
So it's a very. very unstable.
very insecure place.
And so there is the beginnings
of popular uprising in Paris.
A lot of that is being driven
by the communist resistance.
De Gaulle is quite
keen to get to Paris.
because what he doesn't
is Paris to
become liberated by
the communist resistance.
He does not want
to liberate France
only for it to fall into
the hands of communism.
To ensure that
French troops liberate Paris.
General De Gaulle
requires the support
of the Supreme
Allied Commander:
General Dwight Eisenhower.
De Gaulle
didn't have that many cards
to play in 1944.
but he played them
as skillfully as anybody.
There is a French unit.
the Second Armored Division.
controlled by General
Philippe Leclerc. that
has been disobeying American
orders to get closer
and closer and closer to
the city so that it could
go into Paris if it had to.
And so De Gaulle
became very aggressive about
steering the Second
Armored Division toward the city.
He gave General
Leclerc specific
instructions to. "No matter what
these Americans tell you.
I need you to get to Paris."
As Winston
Churchill would say.
he tends to love to bite
the hand that feeds him.
You have to give
him credit. though.
for he has his eye on one thing.
and that's a free France.
Shortly after D-Day.
in coordination with
their Western allies.
the Soviets throw
the massed might of the Red
Army against the Germans.
Operation Bagration is
the gigantic Soviet offensive
in summer of 1944.
Roughly timed to coincide
with the Allies
landing in Normandy.
It is just
a monstrous offensive.
About two and a half million
Soviets are thrown into battle.
Half a million Germans are killed.
wounded. or captured.
It erased an entire
German army group from the map.
the entire central portion of
the German front in the east.
Now the Soviet army
is moving in to Poland.
and you've gotta remember that.
of course.
Poland was the reason
the war started.
In the fall of 1939.
Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin
agreed to divide Poland.
When Hitler took Poland.
he treated it like the laboratory
for his racial ideas.
his plans to annihilate
the Jewish people
and to treat the
Eastern Slavic people
as essentially a slave
race to work to death.
Poland has been
stained in blood and killing.
crushed beneath
the German jackboot.
its soil watered with the blood of
vast numbers of its
Jewish community.
The Poles have been
living through hell for five years.
If you're a resident of Warsaw.
you are one of the most
unlucky people
ever to have lived.
Throughout this
horror show that has been
inflicted upon the Poles.
they have maintained
a shadow government.
a kind of national cohesion.
They have a government-in-exile
in London.
and it is sending orders
to a home army.
a sort of
secret army of underground
resistance fighters in Poland.
The Polish Home Army
was formed really
immediately after
the Germans invaded.
There was a real sense.
in amongst the Polish community.
and especially the young
people: "We're gonna fight."
It was always set up as a
formal military organization.
It wasn't just an ad hoc
bunch of partisans.
They undertook intelligence
gatherings of troop movements.
They gathered
information about the camps.
about Auschwitz. and others.
The Home Army is
led by a former cavalry officer
who has been fighting
the Germans since 1939...
General Tadeusz Bór-Komorowski.
On July 29th. 1944.
as the Allies are
slicing through France.
the Soviets reach
the outskirts of Warsaw.
The Polish Home Army
is waiting for the moment
when the Germans
are about to retreat
and just before
the Soviets arrive.
Because that is the opportunity
to reassert Polish independence.
the Polish state.
They
wanted to prove to the world
that they stood
on their own feet
and that they fought to
liberate their own country.
They don't want to give
up the Nazi dictatorship
and just have it replaced
with a Soviet dictatorship.
The Polish Home Army
and General Bór-Komorowski
have long planned
for this moment.
There are weapons caches.
command structures.
There are instructions
coming from senior officers
based in London.
There is a plan.
Tens of thousands
of Home Army troops
will go all over the city
and go for the
most important things:
the airports. the bridges.
the main focal
points of Nazi power.
It was a moment where
timing was everything.
If they did it too soon.
the Germans would crush them.
If they did it too late.
the Soviets would conquer them.
The Red Army was coming.
It looked as if there
was just this juggernaut
that was gonna force
the Germans out of the city.
Outside Warsaw.
the Germans regroup
on the banks of the Vistula River.
The Poles hear
the sounds of fighting.
think the Red Army's gonna win.
and they're about to
come into Warsaw.
General Bór-Komorowski
gives the order
to begin the uprising.
The Poles have
been resisting the Germans
for almost five years.
Now. with the Soviets on
the other side of the Vistula.
the Polish Home Army
seizes its opportunity.
Because of the Red Army
coming so quickly
up to the gates of Warsaw.
General Bór-Komorowski gives
the order to start the uprising.
The Polish Home Army
think this is the right moment.
The Russians are approaching.
the Germans are clearly
preparing to evacuate.
and the Poles
appear out of the sewers.
out of the backstreets.
out of the cellars. and
they raise the flag of rebellion.
Civilians
are thrilled. they're jubilant.
For the first time since 1939.
they can sing
the national anthem.
They push trams over.
they build barricades.
and they make it very.
very difficult
for the Germans to fight there.
It's a heroic moment.
an exciting moment.
Poland is rising like a phoenix
out of the ashes.
But the attack does
not go as well as it was hoped.
They do manage to
seize the Post Office.
they manage to seize
an important German arsenal.
but they don't manage
to secure the airportS.
So it's up for grabs
by the end of that day.
You get this sort of
twisted patchwork
of Polish and German control.
which ensures that
there is gonna be
the mother of all street fights.
The Polish Home Army
expected the Germans
controlling Warsaw
to be in retreat.
Instead. the Wehrmacht attacks
the Red Army at the Vistula...
...and retains their
grip on Warsaw.
Adolf Hitler meets
with Heinrich Himmler.
head of the Nazi SS.
On the night
of the 1st of August. 1944.
Himmler goes up to
the Wolfsschanze.
he sees Hitler.
and Hitler's raging around.
And Himmler goes.
"You know. Mein Fuhrer.
let's use this as a moment to
erase Warsaw from the map.
Because this wretched city
has stood in our way
of German expansion to
the East for hundreds of years.
So let's just do it."
So that evening. they give what's
called "the Order for Warsaw."
The Germans have a plan to
wipe Poland literally
from the face of the Earth.
One. you wanna send a message
to everybody else
that this is
the cost of defying me.
But the other reason is
you want to destroy Poland
as a national identity.
Every
combatant is to be killed.
All men and women and children.
civilians are to be killed.
And then the city
is to be looted.
and then "glattrasiert."
that means razed to the ground.
The Germans
poured in ruthless shock troops
with the express purpose
of destroying them.
The Home Army used up
their caches of weapons very fast.
The Poles
think the Red Army is coming.
The whole thing
depended upon the idea
that Germans were either leaving
or could not reinforce
their existing troops within Warsaw.
Neither of those two things
turned out to be true.
The Germans weren't leaving
and the Soviets weren't coming.
Stalin says.
to everyone's surprise:
"Halt the army."
They can see across the river:
Warsaw is burning.
Although the Soviets
are right across the river.
they make no effort to support
the resistance in its uprising
against the Germans.
Rather. they sit across the river
and watch the Germans
crush the uprising.
Stalin
doesn't just do nothing;
he actively interferes
with the Allies' attempt
to help the Home Army.
the Polish uprising.
From their air bases in Italy.
the British and Americans try
to drop supplies to the Poles.
Churchill asks permission:
"Can Allied planes carrying supplies
use Soviet bases
to refuel and carry out repairs?"
Stalin says no.
Stalin has always hated
the Polish government in London.
which he regards as bourgeois.
imperialist. capitalist.
He has a small
Polish communist group.
He is always planning
to parachute them
in to Poland as his government.
And so Stalin is
content to watch the Germans
utterly destroy
the Polish Home Army.
destroy the population of Warsaw.
and destroy the city itself.
Stalin
wants to conquer Poland.
but he wants to make sure
that it's then turned into
a communist vassal client state.
He wants to wait
until the Nazis have
destroyed the Polish underground
before he enters Warsaw.
Let them do his work for him.
Hitler sends in his
most psychopathic crews
of murderous. grotesque sadists.
Some of them
are the most brutal murderers
of the entire Nazi regime.
Like Oskar Dirlewanger.
Even the SS doesn't
wanna work with him.
They go through
building after building.
and they round these
people up by the thousands
and then mow those people down.
When 5.000.
6.000 bodies are lying there.
then they bring in the
Verbrennungskommando.
these burning commandos.
to burn the bodies.
specialists from places
like Treblinka
who've now become specialists
at burning human flesh.
They loot the entire city
and then they destroy it.
Building by building.
libraries.
museums. everything is destroyed.
The Polish Home Army
surrenders.
General Bór-Komorowski
is imprisoned by the Nazis.
By the end of
the Warsaw Uprising.
about 200.000
civilians have been killed.
Then the remaining population
are sent to camps like Auschwitz.
Some are sent as slave laborers
into the Reich.
So the destruction of Warsaw is
unique in the destruction of cities
in the Second World War in Europe.
In Warsaw. tragically.
the Germans chose
to meet that desire
for Polish independence
with overwhelming force...
...To kill and smash
and eradicate Polish culture.
To say. "No.
you will not liberate yourselves.
In fact.
you have condemned yourselves."
August. 1944.
The Germans are in
full retreat across France.
They begin to evacuate Paris.
Parisians sense a chance
to recapture their city.
But they need a spark.
On the 15th of August.
the Parisian police.
which was 20.000 strong
and had been
collaborating with the Germans
up to that moment.
actually switches sides
and raises the flag
on their building.
giving the sign to
the rest of the city
and. of course.
to the partisans.
that this was the moment
the uprising needed to start.
And so the streets of
Paris become a battlefield.
The French resistance has
been preparing for this moment
for a very long time.
And they act against
the Germans quite rapidly
and quite successfully.
As this happened.
Charles De Gaulle shows up
to Supreme Allied Commander
Eisenhower's headquarters
and go. "We have
to march on Paris."
The Allies
don't particularly like De Gaulle.
but see De Gaulle as a bulwark
against communism.
Eisenhower
is smart enough to know
that it would look really.
really good
if the first troops to enter
Paris were the Free French.
Eisenhower decides
to allow the Free French forces
to send one division into the city
and to help the insurgents
to free the city.
Supported by the
American Fourth Division.
General De Gaulle
orders the French
Second Armored Division into Paris.
Toward the bitter end.
Adolf Hitler
issues instructions
to General von Choltitz.
who was in control of Paris.
to destroy the city.
Hitler. during a phone
call with von Choltitz.
asks: "Is Paris burning?"
And von Choltitz tells him:
"Yes. my Fuhrer.
we burned the city."
Instead.
he negotiates a surrender.
It is the officers
and men of that
Second French Armored
Division who first enter Paris.
So De Gaulle can claim
that the French have
liberated their own capital.
And not just any old French.
not the communist French.
not the resis...
HIS French army.
He is the one
leading the parade
through the streets of Paris.
presenting himself as the legitimate
leader of the French government.
Everyone in
the city has come out now
because they feel that their
moment of liberation is on them.
But there are still
German soldiers in Paris.
General De
Gaulle walked straight ahead
into what appeared to me
to be a hail of fire.
But he went straight ahead
without hesitation.
his shoulders flung back.
Most Germans
have surrendered or fled.
The last are tracked down.
along with French collaborators.
He presents
the liberation of Paris
as a story of self-liberation.
a Paris that was
able to free itself
from the yoke of
the German occupation
without the help of the Allies.
However. let's say.
the Allied presence in the region
also played a major role in
convincing the Germans
that it was time to go.
France will
enter this post-war period
with pride and with confidence.
It's difficult to imagine
how that would've happened
if not for the efforts of all
of the resistance groups
that fought against
Nazi aggression.
But. in Warsaw.
the outcome is different.
The city is razed by the Nazis.
And what remains is captured
and controlled by the Soviets.
Paris. the city of light.
is saved.
Warsaw. and the hope of
the Polish people.
is destroyed.
Resistance is important
for the people of a nation
who do not want
to be subjugated.
While the French and the Poles
rise up against the Germans
within the extermination
camps at Auschwitz and others.
there is also this
spirit of resistance.
The deliberate
killing of Jews by the Nazis
began with bullets.
Shortly after the Germans
invaded the Soviet Union
in June. 1941...
...they started to shoot Jewish
children. women. and men...
...and bury them in
ravines and forests.
But eventually the Nazis
required
a more systematic method
of murder.
There were tens of
thousands of the camps
by the end of the war.
It's a huge infrastructure.
But there were a very
small number of death camps
within this enormous system.
Six death camps.
Chelmno.
which is the original death camp.
Belzec. Sobibor. Treblinka.
and then Auschwitz-Birkenau
and Majdanek.
As the Red Army
pushes into Poland.
the Nazis attempt to
hide their great crime
by dismantling
the killing centers.
They destroyed documents.
They destroyed
the major death camps
at Belzec. Sobibor.
and Treblinka.
They get rid of the vast
majority of the buildings.
They cover them over.
They create farmhouses on the site
to conceal everything
that they've done.
And then as the camps
come into the path
of invading Allied armies.
they evacuate them.
At Auschwitz-Birkenau.
there are prisoners
determined to
document the Nazi murders.
The extermination
camp system
includes the sorting of people.
Some of them are left alive
because they looked as if they
were young or fit or healthy enough.
Those people work in something
called a Sonderkommando.
They are supposed
to sort the clothing.
sort the hair that's
been cut off people.
to move the corpses.
all these terrible.
terrible jobs
that they're given.
In 1944 in
Auschwitz-Birkenau.
members of the resistance movement
manage to smuggle
a camera into the camp.
The Sonderkommando.
who were witnessing
all of these things
on a day-to-day basis.
secure this camera.
and their ambition is to
use this camera to
record images of
what's happening within the camp
in order for those pictures
to stir the world to respond.
One prisoner
manages to photograph the horror.
Four images of hell.
The really
extraordinary thing about them
is that the images
themselves are framed
from within the doorway
of the gas chamber building itself.
So the images testify
to the bravery
of what this man was doing
and the appalling depravity
of the process at that stage.
And what we see
within these images
are the burning of bodies
outside the crematoria.
And we see people being undressed.
waiting to be brought
into the gas chamber.
The film is
put into a tube of toothpaste
and then smuggled out
to the Polish Home Army.
This is perhaps
the single most valuable
photographic evidence
to emerge from Auschwitz.
The Jews fought back from 1933
to the end of the war.
There are escapes.
There are individual killings
of guards by prisoners.
The Jews are fighting
back this entire time.
Resistance is what
gives us testimony
of what happened
in those places.
In the fall of 1944.
Nazi Germany is retreating
on all fronts...
except one:
their war against the Jews.
Auschwitz-Birkenau
is now the front line.
Killing Jews is not
a secondary by-product
of their military goals:
It is their military goal.
From Hitler's
perspective. it's worth
apportioning resources to it
despite what's
happening elsewhere.
In fact. they accelerate
the process of mass murder.
In 1944.
the Nazis decide to
exterminate the Hungarian
Jewish population.
So a special train line is
built into Auschwitz-Birkenau.
and hundreds of thousands of
Hungarian Jews are rounded up.
and many of them are murdered
within a few hours of
their arriving at the camp.
1944 is
when Auschwitz hits
its terrible. appalling peak
in terms of the number
of people killed.
Requests start to
come to the U.S. government
to bomb either the rail lines.
the gas chambers at Auschwitz.
the crematoria.
the bridges leading
to these camps.
The idea of
bombing death camps
is difficult operationally
and it's difficult morally.
You're going to kill the very people
that you're trying to rescue.
Churchill and
Roosevelt's perspective:
humanitarian concerns
were always secondary
to winning the war.
They would say:
"The best thing that we
can do to help these people
is to bring the war to an
end as quickly as possible."
Prisoners at
Auschwitz-Birkenau cannot
afford to wait for the war to end.
They want to survive.
they want to escape.
and they want to
stop the killing.
From the beginning.
there has been
an underground of resistance
at Auschwitz-Birkenau
made up of various
groups of prisoners.
including the Sonderkommando.
The Sonderkommando
starts to realize that
there are fewer and fewer
of these transports
coming from Hungary.
"The extermination process is
finishing; our time is coming.
and if we don't act quickly.
we're going to be killed."
So they started to
look at ways they could resist.
They might die trying.
there's a very good chance
that they'll die trying. but
at least they can
give themselves a chance.
Because they're determined
to do whatever they can
to meet the moment
on their own terms.
Auschwitz is
a death camp.
and it's also a forced
labor facility.
And so there were women
who were working in the armaments
factories nearby Auschwitz
who had access to gunpowder.
One member
of the underground
is part of a slave labor unit
that sorts the clothing
of the dead: Roza Robota.
She makes contact
with the Sonderkommando.
They form a plan to
destroy the crematoria.
provoke a wider uprising.
and attempt to escape.
Robota enlists Jewish women
working in the munitions factory
to smuggle gunpowder:
Ala Gertner.
Regina Safirsztajn.
and Esther Wajcblum.
So they secured these
explosives at enormous risk.
and they're smuggling
them through
various kind of ingenious means.
They create little packets of
fabric that they hide them in.
and they get them through.
The women
are collecting the gunpowder
to hand them off
to their friend Roza.
She is going to
get the gunpowder
into the hands of the
Sonderkommando.
who are going to
use it to try to blow up
the crematoria
where they're working.
At a certain moment.
an individual takes
an improvised weapon and
launches at a member of the SS.
and that kick-starts
the whole thing.
There's smoke.
there's noise. there's shouting.
and there's gunfire.
The resistors
end up blowing up. in part.
one of the crematoria.
Crematoria IV.
It's put permanently
out of commission.
So the Sonderkommando
would've considered
that to be a success.
And in another crematory building.
the Sonderkommando
force some the guards
into one of the ovens alive.
Some prisoners escape.
but are quickly
caught and executed.
The three
women who have been
stealing the gunpowder.
plus Roza Robota
are to be hanged..
And just as the noose
is put around her neck.
she yells out to the group
of prisoners assembled:
"Vengeance."
or. "Sisters. avenge."
It is a passionate message
of resilience. resistance.
and continue the fight.
In December.
the Red Army advances
on Auschwitz-Birkenau.
The SS forced prisoners
on marches into Germany.
Thousands die.
On January 27th. 1945.
Soviet soldiers arrive at the
gates of Auschwitz-Birkenau.
Auschwitz
really became the center
of the mass murder of Europe's
Jews quite late in the war.
The important thing to
know is that 80%
of the Jews murdered
in the Holocaust
were not murdered at Auschwitz.
but elsewhere in places
that are either
forgotten or largely overlooked.
The Nazis
and their collaborators
murder six million Jews
during the war.
Millions of others
die at their hands.
But in the face of
unimaginable conditions
and inconceivable cruelty...
...some find a way to resist.
Resistance
takes so many forms.
There's armed
resistance and uprising.
and that happens
throughout Europe.
There is spiritual resistance.
Just the idea that
you are not going to die
just because
the Nazis want you to.
you are going to try to survive.
You are going to document
what is happening.
write letters. write diaries.
bury them in the ground
so that someday we will be able to
talk about what
you went through.
The nature of tyranny
becomes evident in World War II.
The Nazis and the Japanese
imperialists
are invading their neighbors.
kidnapping. slave laborers.
murdering those
who disagree with them.
It was a natural reaction
on the part of
the occupied peoples
to organize some
form of resistance.
And it happens
all over the world in World War II.
After surviving
Auschwitz and Buchenwald.
Nobel Laureate Elie Wiesel said:
"We must always take sides.
Neutrality helps the oppressor.
never the victim.
Silence encourages the tormentor.
never the tormented.
Sometimes we must interfere."
In the Pacific. President
Franklin Roosevelt.
General Douglas MacArthur.
and Admiral Chester Nimitz
meet in Pearl Harbor to draw
a plan for the final defeat
- of Imperial Japan.
- Subtitles by Sky Access Services
Watch Online Movies and Series for FREE
www.osdb.link/lm